---
title: Yak Shaving
date: 2016-08-01 04:30 PDT
tags: trip-report,multipitch
published: true
---
![Yak](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/yak-landscape.jpg)

<span class="dropcap">W</span>ith another weekend of bad weather in the North
Cascades, we turned our eyes north, to BC, for some lengthy, moderate
multi-pitch. Squamish was out of the question -- too many people, too many
lines. 

Instead, we'd travel a few hours east towards the Coquihalla Range, enticed by
its excellent rock quality and relative obscurity. Our objective? *Seven One
Move Wonders of the World* (5.8-/PG-13, III), an infrequently climbed fifteen
pitch friction slab bonanza that meanders up Yak Peak's SW face.

READMORE

Our base of operations for the weekend would be the scenic Zopkios Rest Area, a
truck stop. Pro-tip: Bring earplugs. A refrigerated truck parked next to us the
first night and proceeded to idle 'til it departed around 5AM. Neither of
us got much sleep.

#### Day One: Is This Our Route?

The plan was simple: get an early start Saturday and be climbing by sunrise.
We'd spend Sunday bouldering and cragging near Harrison Hot Springs, which
Mountain Project promised was well-maintained, with a bevy of closely spaced
trad routes and boulders.

The evening prior, we'd run into a pair of climbers who'd climbed Yak Check and
asked about SOMWOW and the trail. They knew the route but hadn't climbed it, and
directed us to a path about 1km up the road. Though it contradicted the route
description, which had the trail starting just out of the rest area, we'd found
no sign of it and decided to trust the locals. Mistake #1.

We donned headlamps and started up the road at quarter to five. If everything
was as described, we'd pop out of the woods right at the base of our route.
Instead, we emerged under *Yak Check*, a considerably more popular line nearly a
kilometer to the east of our intended climb. Undeterred -- and not yet realising
how far off we were -- we traversed westwards along the base.

![Yak](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/yak-check.jpg)

An hour's scrambling and multiple consultations of the topo and route
description had us at a loss. There were a few features that looked *almost*,
but not quite like the ones we'd seen in other climber's TRs, but no evidence of
anchors on the face or the "two ponds" we were to belay between. In our defense,
1,000' expanses of fourth class slab look pretty similar ðŸ˜¬.

Westward progress was halted by a thicket of pines and the realisation that
Camille had lost her climbing shoes during the traverse. Our real-life round of
"Where's Waldo" with green TC Pros on brown-ish tinged granite took up another
hour and a half.

Now convinced we'd taken the wrong trail and concerned it was too late in the
day to complete the route and descent before nightfall, we descended back to the
rest area to find the proper start. Diving straight through the brush at the second
telephone ball, just past the brake check sign, we saw a flash of orange to our
left -- a trail marker! To save you repeating our mistake,
[here's a GPX we recorded the next morning][gaia-gps].

#### Day 2: Do you see any bolts?

![Yak](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/yak-start.jpg)

The forecast for the second day was grim, so we set out with two ropes lest we
were forced to retreat. From the proper trail the initial belay is obvious and
well-marked with cairns. We roped up, consolidated packs for the carryover, and
got to climbing.

We found the first seven pitches were 5.- strolls. On several, it was possible
to walk straight up, sans hands. Apart from a cool move on P3, which followed a
flower-filled crack, we didn't find any of the "One Move Wonders" or the bolts
mentioned in the topo. Simulclimbing these would have sped up the climb
significantly and not been much riskier - there are bolted belays metres and
only one or two placements per pitch either way.

There was some trouble finding the anchors for pitch eight, and we ended up ten
metres above them. As the topo warned, the bolts were between two large wet
streaks, and the traverse couldn't be protected. It would've been safer to stay
to the right on the broken rock band and belay the UFO pitch from a gear anchor;
rope drag wouldn't be much worse.

![Relaxing at the P8 anchor](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/ufo.jpg)

From here, the climbing improved, and grades began to seem more appropriate. The
mantle over the UFO was wet enough to spice up an otherwise bland lead. The
technical crux of the route comes at the end, with the eleventh, twelfth,
and thirteenth pitches building in both difficulty and length of runout.

We made it through eleven and twelve in good form, and then had a bit of a scare
on the thirteenth. Though considerably worse at slab than my
technically-proficient partner, I'm less shaken by being far above pro (i.e.
less likely to imagine the consequences) and got to lead the crux. Unable to
spot the first bolt after leaving the belay, I eventually located the
the second far above and to the right. The only spot for intermediate pro was a
dirt-filled lip to our left. With a \#0.3 in place, I padded towards the most
nervewracking traverse of my short climbing career.

I'd failed to notice returning right would require crossing a markedly less
featured portion of slab. **Wet** slab. Swearing under my breath, I prayed to
the friction gods with every step. The cry of "HALF ROPE!" sounds an arm's
length from the clipping stance. Feet planted precariously, I removed a sling from my shoulder and leaned in for
the clip. My right foot slipped.

Performing my best impression of the Howard Dean scream, visions of
cheese-grating sixty metres down the face run through my head. I throw all my
weight to the left and push off, right arm outstretched. The carabiner's nose
finds its mark. I hurriedly clip the rope and move upwards to a better stance,
then rush to finish the remaining twenty-five metres. Placements are ample but
unnecessary, the final move a fun, juniper-assisted step to the anchors. Once
secured, I plop down and enjoy a few moments reflecting on the "fun" of trad.

With all but one cam still on my harness, I was elected to lead the penultimate,
fourteenth pitch as well. Not one to learn from my mistakes, I strayed too far
right and made it a fair bit more difficult for myself and the follower. Again,
we could only find the second bolt.

From P14 anchors, you've the choice of continuing upwards to the summit or
rappelling to the base. Not fancying thirteen double rope raps on shallow slab,
we opted for the walk-off. Camille lead the final pitch, a proper adventure
climb with plentiful trees for slinging.

![Enjoying the view and some sustenance from the meadow above P15](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/summit-cookies.jpg)

Though the summit was still a few hundred feet away, we paused to savour the
cookies we'd saved for the end of fifth class terrain and relief from our
climbing shoes' confines.

#### Summit Scramble & Descent

The remaining scrambling was exposed and chossy. Safety-conscious parties (and
especially those without approach shoes) may want to remain roped up for the
first section past P15, which is 5.Fun gravel masquerading as rock. From above
the meadow, the path to the summit is straightforward. Bear north, making ample
use of juniper bushes for self-belay. Views from the summit pyramid are
remarkable.

![Summit](/log/posts/yak-shaving-2016-08-01/summit-view.jpg)

From the summit, descent is to the north. Follow the cairns down and
across the gully towards the Yak Crack trail. Including scrambling, my bad
knees, and some backtracking to find the proper trail, it was roughly three hours
back to the car. 


##### Gear Beta

We had way too much gear. Rack included pink and brown tricams, single C4s
0.5-4, C3s 00-2, .2 and .1 X4s, and a set of nuts. C3s and nuts never left the
harness. Highly recommend bringing a #3.5 or #4.

We brought a second rope in case we had to rappel and wouldn't countenance climbing
the route without one. Even a spritz of rain would render otherwise trivial
portions extremely difficult.

[gaia-gps]: https://www.gaiagps.com/public/0IpZGKHFFmHx0YokXAOrh6ME/#?layer=CalTopo
